Engagement Guide
This is a work in progress, to which you're welcome to contribute. The intention is that it will be drafted, redrafted, and mercilessly edited as time goes on and as the environment changes: so if you think anything is on the wrong track, don't be shy about suggesting even foundational changes. Also, thank you to @blaisehebert for the outline. I should have credited as such in the edit summary.

Contents
Preface
Fallacies of Engagement, Social Media, and Crowd-Everything
Square One
The Heartbeat Model
Defining Your Community
Always Bring a Gun to a Knife Fight (The How)
Adding Rhythm
Stimulation is Your Responsibility
Locations and Platforms
Et Cetera (Glossary and Resources)
1. Preface
Preamble
To be established later. In the meantime, it is simply that the misconceptions about engagement are trumping the experience on the subject, and we believe that would-be practitioners would be well-served by a brief overview of best practices. 


What Engagement Is and Is Not
Engagement is not consultation or communication. Engagement is not something you do; rather, it is something people feel. It is a sense of meaningful connection to an idea, organization, process, or outcome.

As such, this document is generally applicable to different opportunities for engagement:

Citizen engagement in policy-making
Stakeholder engagement in decision-making
Employee engagement within organizations and teams
Building communities around ideas, practices, or platforms
However, this document will written largely from the point of view of general stakeholder engagement. That is, involving others in information-gathering or decision-making, and where contributions are based on discretionary effort.

Importantly, two things engagement most certainly is: hard, and complex. 


The Burning Platform
Governments around the world are entering an era of unprecedented citizen participation in governance. In Canada, commitments to the Open Government Partnership include open dialogue with Canadians on major policy issues. Within organizations, employee engagement is increasingly understood to be a key driver of value, particularly for creative knowledge work. And in both cases, increased engagement with stakeholders reveals the complexity of operating environments, creates legitimacy for decisions, and builds community for future collaboration.

The challenge is that most organizations are struggling to scale the learning curve required for effective engagement. This includes evolving from communications to conversations, and reconsiling existing governance with a need for flexibility and empowerment. There is also a danger in attempts at broad participation in decision-making: insufficient efforts will actually degrade trust in officials, discourage future participation, all the while lacking the feedback required for course correction.

Example: The Red Tape Challenge (U.K.)

"The results of this exercise do not represent any major change to traditional challenges to consultation processes, in fact, the findings suggest even less informed consultation processes."

http://www.lse.ac.uk/researchAndExpertise/units/CARR/pdf/DPs/DP72-Lodge-Wegrich.pdf




2. The Fallacies of Engagement, Social Media, and Crowd-Everything
Engagement is Not Communication, it's a Conversation
14 years ago the authors of The Cluetrain Manifesto proclaimed that "Markets are conversations." It's the same for governance.

The reason conversations are engaging is the constant feedback. It's clear when input is meaningfully received. Every day people unconsciously pepper conversations with "Uh huh", "Really", or body language as indicators that they're listening and understanding. Knowing that we're connecting to a person is what keeps us engaged in conversations, just as seeing the connection between our work and our organization keeps us engaged in our jobs. And seeing the connection between their input and decisions is what keeps people engaged in consultations.

Therein lies the goal for consultations: to ensure that the decision-making process is connected to the conversations taking place, and to find ways to prove it. The consultation equivalents of "Uh huh":

"Could you expand on that?"
"That would be useful because..."
"We can't do that because..." (Even nil answers prove active listening, and give participants information for future contributions.)
But, that engagement is anything but a conversation is just one common fallacy.

The Biggest Fallacies
Build it and they will come

Power Law - Blaise?

More participation is better

Weak participatory exercises or check-box consultations aren't just a poor use of peoples' time, they're actively counterproductive. People need to see the connection between their effort and the results gained through engagement efforts, and will be less likely to contribute in the future if they do not. In the jargon, it decreases their marginal benefit of participating.

My group is special

People see value in giving input

People see value in impacting decisions. Even light-engagement exercises like polling and surveys should be connected back to those who participate; participants should be updated about the data, the resultant decision, and the rationale connecting the two. Err on the side of being overly transparent. It's unlikely that a few thank-you and follow-up emails will be burdensome for past participants. 


3. Square One
Setting Goals
The first step is setting goals. Any activity consuming stakeholders' time should solve a problem, or further an objective; soliciting participation for participation's, or optics', sake is counterproductive. Without an objective, exercises will lack meaning for participants and not be an effective use of their time.

Of course, things such as strengthening communities, establishing trust, and informing stakeholders are all valid goals. However, they are likely to be better served by interactions within the context of a broader, shared objective.

The desired outcome of an activity will inform everything else that follows: selecting participants, methods, outputs (records, decisions, communications), and the required governance within your organization.

Content is King, but Context is the Kingdom
Value propositions
Otherwise known as WIIFT - What's In It For Them. Designers of participation activities have create a meaningful reason why people would want to spend time contributing, and communicate it. When consulting on a decision, this may be because there is a clear process whereby they can influence the outcome. When soliciting ideas, this may be because you've convinced others of the value of your project, or because participants will get networking, education, or idea generating opportunities through participation.

This is complicated by the fact that a group of people will contain both a wide range of motivations and a wide range of levels of motivation. Some will understand the value of the exercise intuitively; others may require repeated, personal, and/or face-to-face interaction to contribute fully. Establishing personas, discussed later, can help inform communications and methods.

Crafting a Business Case
Examples and How To



4. The Heartbeat Model of Engagement
Co-creation is the baseline, not a vision of the future
Learning from storytelling and television
Getting active participation
Examples and How To



5. Defining Your Community
Deciding on Your Audience
Network Analysis to Find Unknowns
Establishing a Shared Understanding of Purpose
Casting for Success
Examples and How To



6. Always Bring a Gun to a Knife Fight
Turning Challenges Into Drivers for Activity
Structure and Process are Your Best Friends
Designing Activities Across a Spectrum of Engagement
Examples and How To



7. Adding Rhythm
Task Decomposition
What Make a Good Task
Feedback Loops
Examples and How To



8. Stimulation is Your Responsibility
Practice (Practice Practice)
Leveraging the Attention Economy
Useability
Those seeking to engage a community cannot rely solely on making information available - that is, relying on email, or updates posted online - to drive action. There tends to be a gap between what one thinks people should do, and what people can be reasonably expected to do. Many people do not read entire emails or webpages. Take care to make vital information unmistakably clear, use multiple channels, and be repetitive leading up to an event. People expect reminders from those asking for their time and effort. Others will require more personal interactions to drive them to engage; key voices in communities should be contacted personally.

Most importantly, take advantage of an impartial editor. When crafting communications to a community, get feedback from multiple sources, both those who know the project well and those who are laymen. Test your assumptions about how you're getting through to people ("How would you like us to communicate with you?", etc.). What's clear to you is frequently not to others.

In short, consider the useability of your communications and events.

Examples and How To



9. Location (Location Location)
Virtual is Good, But Never Enough
Tools ≠ Technology
IRL
Examples and How To



10. Et Cetera
Glossary
Resources
Contact Information
Acknowledgements
